Michael Edmonson
2/17/2017
UW: Final P1
Professor Albu

To Be And Not To Be, That Is The Answer
With “The Third Man,” Rodriguez explores the ambiguity of the Hispanic identifier––something he describes as the gray passing lane between black and white. Indeed, Rodriguez cannot identify with the historical struggle of being black in America any more than he can with the colorless freedom of being white. Like Rodriguez, I too struggle to identify on either side of the black-white polarity: half yellow, half white, I see myself as a sort of off-white. I should note that I have composed a number of essays about my experiences as an off-white but none have been nearly as fragmented as his. Indeed, Rodriguez vacillates between a present-tense panel discussion on Race Relations and an analysis of the pigments Fra Angelico uses in his Transfiguration. He writes first about the history of segregation and slavery in the United States, then abruptly explains the blues and his theory about the homoeroticism in Huckleberry Finn. Rodriguez imagines a conversation with his friend Darrell about skin color, but he tosses that conversation into a hall of mirrors that makes Darrell’s voice indistinguishable from his own. 
With such a fragmented narrative, Rodriguez leaves a great bit of work to the reader to perform on his or her own––unusual for an essay, where the common practice is to outline one’s thoughts with a neat, easy-to-follow organization. One ponders: why does Rodriguez opt for such a non-linear essay format? Does he seek to deliberately confuse the reader, particularly in his conversation with Darrell? Perhaps the scrambled format mirrors the gray, intersectional nature of the Hispanic identifier; perhaps Rodriguez deemed it more effective to show the tangle of being Hispanic rather than to explicitly state it. (I personally found this choice more compelling for I too live by the Dickinson’s maxim Tell all the truth but tell it slant.) 
Rodriguez’s imagined conversation with Darrell illustrates this identity-crisis experience nicely. The dialogue begins organically: he separates his and Darrell’s dialogue with normal type-face and italics, respectively. At first, it is clear who speaks and who advocates for which position––Darrell believes that race is as simple as how “the white cop sees you”; Rodriguez counters that he never sees himself as “brown” (Rodriguez, 136-137). Darrell’s voice is at first distinct from Rodriguez’s: he speaks in short phrases (“You know what I’m talking about…” and “What do you say?”) while Rodriguez allots himself multiple sentences to counter whatever Darrell says. Rodriguez indeed relies on long lists as a rhetorical tool: “Without race, we wouldn’t have music, movies, prisons, politics, history, libraries, colleges, private conversations, motives. Dorothy Dandridge. Bill Clinton” (Rodriguez, 136). In contrast, Darrell seems to belittle whatever Rodriguez says with punchy, short sentences: “Yes you do. You say, queer Indian Catholic––some sidestep bullshit like that” (Rodriguez, 137). Clearly, the voices of Darrell and Rodriguez are distinct: Darrell is curt, Rodriguez is more verbose and speaks in lists.
But Darrell’s dialogue takes a swift turn after Rodriguez––indicated by normal type face––ask him about the one-drop theory. “Too easy, Rodriguez,” Darrell responds in his usual, punchy voice. But after those three words, Rodriguez (the writer) places a line break, as if to separate Darrell’s interjection from the uncharacteristic rant that follows it. From this pivot point, Darrell continues and his voice grows indistinguishable from Rodriguez’s. Conspicuously, he begins to speak in lists as well: “You can have black and blue. You can have black and white. You can have The Red and the Black. But you can’t have reddish black or light black or blackish..” (Rodriguez, 138). “Darrell” even begins to pose rhetorical questions: “Is my fly open? Am I scaring somebody? Is there a third choice?” (Rodriguez, 138). It is important to note that Rodriguez uses an identical rhetorical style frequently throughout the rest of the essay: “What was the point of the Negro Civil Rights movement[?]” (Rodriguez, 128); “So it was possible to lose, after all? If culture is so fated, how could I have lost it?” (Rodriguez, 129); “What of white, then?” (Rodriguez, 139). With such a strong resemblance to Rodriguez’s style, the italicized text seems hardly to be exclusively Darrell’s––indeed, Rodriguez seems to bestow Darrell with his own rhetorical voice through this rant. Rodriguez’s choice to essentially fuse himself with Darrell is without doubt deliberate, but begs further inquiry: why do Rodriguez and Darrell become indistinguishable from one another by the end of this conversation? Why does Rodriguez––as the writer and as a character advocating an opposite view––grant Darrell the conclusive final word?
The answer, I believe, is the core project of Rodriguez’s entire essay: Rodriguez grants Darrell the final word because he is sympathetic to the black struggle but he is not black himself. Instead, he is gray. Rodriguez identifies with Darrell because the Hispanic (“gray”) identifier is dichotomous and contradictory: it is neither black nor white but both black and white. Accordingly, Rodriguez can partially identify with blacks and whites: despite discussion about being a “third man” in the beginning of the essay, Rodriguez draws attention to the way that “blacks-and-Latinos” are frequently grouped together as the “disadvantaged in America” (Rodriguez, 126). He cites history: Hispanics sought to piggyback on the Negro Civil Rights movement in the 1960s to “claim the spoils of affirmative action” (Rodriguez, 127). He also emphasizes the academic discourse on Hispanics and their rise to America’s “Biggest Minority,” citing a 2006 Wall Street Journal article (Rodriguez, 126). With these paragraphs, Rodriguez draws external connections between blacks and Hispanics––to the government, economists, and policy makers, Hispanics look far more black than they do white. But Rodriguez also opens up a bit near the end of his essay, revealing that he grew up “an honorary white,” which “meant only that [he] was not black” (Rodriguez, 141). In fact, he grew up “wanting to be white”––to be “colorless”––and “[he] achieved it” (Rodriguez, 140–141). Indeed, by dissociating himself from being black, Rodriguez seems to personally see himself as more white than black. His external-identifications and his self-identifications are therefore at odds: he is part of a disadvantaged minority as if he were black, but lacks the requisite “one-drop” to be able to call himself such. 
This context gives new meaning to Rodriguez’s imagined conversation with Darrell. Darrell (or Rodriguez’s portrayal of him) has such an authority in this dialogue because Rodriguez possesses such a voice too, as another minority that can identify with elements of the black struggle. Perhaps Rodriguez too can empathize with the difficulties of being an African-American today; he too can understand how it feels when a white cop reduces him to a projection of skin color. Contrary to what we anticipate, Rodriguez does refute Darrell; instead, he grants Darrell the authority on the matter. It is because Rodriguez can sympathize––if not empathize––with these troubles that he actually gives Darrell the final word. But as he makes clear by calling himself a Third Man, he must necessarily distance himself a bit from the black struggle, voicing––through a black friend––words that may actually be his own. Rodriguez creates this distance because he is not entirely black like Darrell: he is gray, possessing a dual nature that is both black and white. And because white and black experiences are antithetical, on opposite sides of the color spectrum, Rodriguez’s hint of whiteness (one extreme) pulls him away from Darrell’s blackness (the other extreme) and toward the center.
Throughout the majority of this essay, Rodriguez seems to portray this duality as a sort of burden––“Americans dislike gray,” (Rodriguez, 125), so by the transitive property, they must also dislike the complexity of Hispanic. But Rodriguez masterfully makes an opposite point by as he concludes his essay: the Hispanic identifier is in America’s future; it is what “Latin America might give the United States… a more playful notion of race” (Rodriguez, 142). Indeed, Rodriguez seems to insinuate that the Hispanic “gray” is not the mere passing lane he had described; rather, it is a bridge to mend the black-white dichotomy from Darrell to the white waiter who complains about being “nothing” (Rodriguez, 141). Rodriguez concludes: “Only further confusion can save us” (Rodriguez, 142). 
He ties together his essay by describing his favorite San Francisco couple, a Chinese-American man and an African-American woman,
“…who both have blond hair and wear Hawaiian shirts and ride around town in a vintage red Pontiac convertible with white leather upholstery. The use of vegetable hair dyes is a great boon to American youth, wouldn’t you say? Such wonderfully false colors allow young Americans to be and not to be. Blue or chartreuse or Lucille Ball… Nothing permanent. It all washes out. (Rodriguez, 145). 

Here, Rodriguez analogizes skin color and race to something as malleable and transient as hair dye. New vegetable hair dyes free the American youth from their natural hair color, adding a liberating, refreshing ambiguity to the American notion of race (see: the Asian-American/African-American couple with blond hair). But there is a single salient line in this hair-dying analogy that serves to synthesize the entire experience of being gray––that the use of vegetable dyes allows Americans “to be and not be” (Rodriguez, 143). To both be and not be––to be in both states simultaneously. To both be Darrell’s voice but not be black. 
By analogy, Rodriguez seems to argue that the Hispanic identifier offers the same liberation. To reiterate, just as hair dyes enable Americans to both “be and not be”, so too does being Hispanic allow Rodriguez to be neither black nor white but both black and white. In some ways, this complicates his life: it is precisely why Rodriguez can speak on Darrell’s behalf with his own rhetorical style but must do so from a distance. Nevertheless, being Hispanic does not restrict Rodriguez. It does quite the opposite: being gray is what frees him from the black-white binary. 
Of course, there is quite a bit more variation in the color gray than there is in either black or white. And such variation is confusing: one must precisely indicate how light or dark to actually specify a hue. But, to echo Rodriguez, such “confusion” is what will “save us” (Rodriguez, 142). “Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow,” Rodriguez promises, ambiguously (Rodriguez, 143). Indeed, gray is the color of the future: it is not only the color of old age but the color of sky scrapers as well. Gray is an umbrella; it is the entire spectrum from bleached white to jet black, possessing an infinite number of distinct shades… as well as infinite permutations of different hair colors, skin colors, religions, sexual orientations, and beyond. 


1782 words





Works Cited

Rodriguez, Richard. “The Third Man.” In Brown: The Last Discovery of America.
New York: Viking, 2002. 125-143.